Drug use in our society has increased drastically in the past decade.  Although some statistics show that alcohol and marijuana use among teenagers has dropped slightly in recent years, overall, drug use has exploded with the use/abuse of opioids and the introduction of new drugs like fentanyl and designer “drugs” like flavored vape. 
  
Unlike with my grandparents’ generation that really only used alcohol and tobacco, my generation is faced with a variety of new drugs such as Cocaine, Heroin and Fentanyl.  Not only are these drugs much more powerful and addictive, but they are extremely dangerous.  
One of the oldest and most widely used drugs is tobacco. There are many ways to use tobacco, such as smoking, snorting, chewing or vaporized. Short term health effects include increased blood pressure, breathing, and heart rate. Long term effects include lung cancer when smoked, oral cancer when chewed, chronic bronchitis, emphysema, heart disease, leukemia, cataracts, and pneumonia. Other health related issues include pregnancy miscarriage, low birth weight, stillbirth and learning and behavior problems.

Another drug that has been used almost as long as tobacco is alcohol.  Alcohol is a depressant and interferes with the way nerve cells normally send, receive, and process information. They do this by imitating the brain's chemical systems and circuits which affects many of the brain's functions including learning, judgment, decision making, stress, memory loss, and behavior.

Although cocaine is one of the oldest of the naturally occurring drugs, its popularity has increased significantly since the 1970’s. This powerful substance is typically sold in the form of a crystallized rock or powder which can be ingested through snorting, smoking or injecting. It is highly addictive and can cause headaches, seizures, lung damage and lead to an HIV infection.

Heroin is a highly addictive drug, even more than cocaine.  It is an opioid made from morphine, a natural substance extracted from the seed pod of various opium poppy plants. The drug’s common forms are typically a white or brownish powder or black sticky substance known as “black tar heroin”.  People can take this drug through injections, smoking, or snorting. The short term health effects include euphoria, dry mouth, itching, nausea, vomiting, analgesia, slowed breathing and heart rate. Long term effects may include collapsed veins, abscesses (swollen tissue with pus), an infection of the lining and valves in the heart, constipation and stomach cramps, liver or kidney disease and pneumonia.
 
Fentanyl is an extremely powerful drug. It is similar to morphine, but it is much stronger. It is used to treat patients with severe pain or to manage pain after coming out of surgery. Many people who believe they are purchasing heroin are actually purchasing Fentanyl. This can often result in overdose and death. Fentanyl can be used by injection, snorting/sniffing, smoking, or it can be taken orally by pill or tablet.  This drug may cause changes in pupillary size, cold and clammy skin, cyanosis, coma, and respiratory failure leading to death.

As shown in figure 1 (National Overdose Deaths), the number of overdose deaths has increaased from approximately twenty four thousand in 2002 to more than fifty thousand in 2015.  And although more men die from drug overdoses than women, the growth in the death rates of women generally mirror that of men.
   
Most recently, e-cigarettes and vaping have been developed to reduce some of the risks of traditional cigarettes. However, doctors and scientists are starting to realize that vaping has its own hazards. To date, “there have been thirty six documented deaths and over fourteen hundred reported to hospitalizations'' as a result to vaping. Like many of the other drugs above, vaping is extremely addictive, mainly due to the designer flavors that have been developed that target young kids such as cool mint, crème brulee,and fruit medley. A lot of young teens start experiencing drugs in high school and end up getting addicted. In my high school, a lot of kids would go to the bathrooms and Juul with their friends. What none of them realizes it that the amount of nicotine used in an entire pack of cigarettes is the same amount used in each Juul pod.
 
People use drugs for a variety of reasons.  Some people use drugs to relieve stress. “A 2015 study conducted by the American Psychological Association (APA), measuring stress on a scale from 1-10 found that the average stress level for Americans stood at 5.1, a slight increase from the year before.” Others use drugs to deal with workplace or financial anxieties.  Still others just do it to hang with their friends and act cool. In addition to discovering drugs on their own or through peer pressure, children often get involved with drugs through a parent who is addicted to drugs.
 
Although there is no one single age group that accounts for all drug use, there are certain demographics that use drugs more than others.  In particular, youths in the 18-25 year age group tend to use/abuse drugs more than any other age group. Other demographics that tend to use/abuse drugs are women, the affluent and Baby Boomers. While the reasons aren’t clear, what is clear is that women account for at least 50% of drug users, especially with prescription painkillers and alcohol while usage by the affluent and Baby Boomers may be attributed to financial means and fewer family and professional responsibilities, respectively. 

Drug use takes a terrible toll on individuals, families, and communities and we have developed many ways to fight it.  Border patrols, customs agents and Coast Guard intercept and destroy drugs being smuggled across our borders. Teachers educate children on the dangers of drug use and how it can destroy their life. School counselors work with students to help them manage the pressures of both school and their peers.  And at home we look for ways to reduce stress and maintain a healthy lifestyle. Some people walk. Others do yoga, zumba or join a gym.  Each of these activities are not only good for you physically, but help relieve everyday stress. 
 
Within the last five years, record amounts of illicit drugs, including cocaine, heroin and fentanyl have been seized at U.S. borders.  If they had not been intercepted, they would have made their way into the schools and homes of our children.  They would have poisoned those who struggle to cope with the pressures of everyday life and they would have caused a nightmare for the families and friends of theose affected.  Addiction is a disease that does not discriminate.  It doesn't care who you are or how old you are and it doesn't care if you're male or female.  It takes over your life and in too many cases, takes your life.  Through law enforcement, teachers, mentors and treatment programs, we are fighting back, but as the number of overdose deaths climbs each year, it is apparent that this is a problem that will not go away anytime soon.
 
 
Drug seizure supporting doc:  https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R45812.pdf
